---
layout: article
title: "Political Economy"
author: shom_mazumder
modified: 2015-08-04
categories: research
excerpt: "International and comparative political economy."
comments: true
image:
  teaser: smith-marx.jpg
---

{% include toc.html %}

##International Political Economy

###Is Aid Good for Your Health? A Quasi-Experimental Approach

Scholars and policy-makers often lament foreign aid's inability to deliver sustained political and economic development. I show that foreign aid might actually be more beneficial than we think once one deals with the non-random nature of foreign aid disbursement. Using the rotating Presidency of the Council of the European Union \(EU\) as way to approximate an experimental design, I provide causal evidence that aid from the EU increases overall health across a variety of health indicators. Aid can indeed be a force for good.

###Foreign Aid and Trade Liberalization: Evidence from a Natural Experiment \(with [James Raymond Vreeland](http://faculty.georgetown.edu/jrv24/)\)

Though many scholars consider trade liberalization to be welfare enhancing for society overall, many developing country leaders fail to fully liberalize since liberalization often times entails costs for politically influential interest groups. We argue that an influx of free resources such as foreign aid can spur liberalization since governments can use these resources to compensate the losers from trade. To test our argument, we analyze the relationship between foreign aid and trade liberalization using the rotating Presidency of the Council of the EU as a source of plausibly exogenous variation in foreign aid and find evidence that aid does indeed promulgate trade liberalization. International capital flows play a significant role in driving trade liberalization. 

###Political Influence and Expropriation

Why do governments decide to expropriate a multinational corporation's \(MNC\) assets? While most explanations for expropriation tend to focus on the domestic sources of the decision to expropriate, I argue that these explanations fail to take into account the preferences of an MNC's home government. I argue and show when the United States government has more political influence over a host country government, a host government expropriates less often. Expropriation, then, should be taken in both domestic and international context. 

##Comparative Historical Political and Economic Development

###The Historical Origins of Comparative Political Development: Evidence from the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade

Why do some countries have well-functioning, democratic political institutions while others remain steadfastly autocratic? Building off recent work that traces the impact of historical events on contemporary political economy outcomes, I argue that one such institution that was widespread well into the 19th century--slavery--helped shape the democratic trajectory of many states. Using historical data on slave exports, I show that states with historically a greater portion of the population exported as slaves tend to be less democratic today. My results suggest that many states suffer from the horrors of slavery even until today. 