---
layout: article
title: "Political Methodology"
author: shom_mazumder
categories: research
excerpt: "Applied statistics and machine learning."
comments: true
image:
  teaser: d3-preview.png
---

{% include toc.html %}

##Machine Learning

###Text Analysis of International Law \(with [Eric Arias](https://sites.google.com/a/nyu.edu/ericarias/)\)
An increasing amount of international law manifests itself on paper. In this project, we seek to characterize the evolution of international law within and across various regimes \(eg, trade, investment, and human rights\) and the consequences that they may have on state behavior. To do this, we utilize a number of techniques from the field of text analysis and natural language processing. 

###Data Management and Visualization
As datasets that most social scientists increase in size and as more data becomes available overall, there is an increasing need to find ways to efficiently and effectively process, visualize, and analyze data. I'm currently working with ways to leverage techniques that data scientists use such as Apache Spark, MapReduce, and the D3 JavaScript library to make it easier for social scientists to conduct exploratory and inferential data analysis. 

##Bayesian Inference

###Precedential Power: The Role of the United States in Shaping International Law at the WTO
[*Link to PDF*]({{site.url}}/files/WTO-Precedent-Draft.pdf)

International trade law, though explicitly denied, implicitly relies on a well-functioning system of precedent. Because of its public-good character, states have incentive to undersupply the socially optimal amount of precedent. I argue that the United States takes on the burden of supplying precedent at the World Trade Organization \(WTO\), but it does so in a way that is consistent with its individual interests. Using a Bayesian statistical framework, I find evidence for a number of empirical implications of my argument.

##Causal Inference

###Leveraging Diffusion to Approximate Natural Experiments in International Relations
One of the main challenges in the field of international relations is to find plausibly exogenous variation in conditions that might affect state behavior--ie, a good natural experiment. I'm currently working on developing statistical methods to leverage the ways in which changes in state policies and behaviors can create plausibly exogenous variation in networked/spatially dependent data. These methods will hopefully allow international relations scholars to test whether international institutions can actually change state behavior--one of the big debates in the international relations literature. 
